---
layout: post
title: Weeknotes — 27th October 2018
date: 2018-10-27 20:30
author: alex
---

- Going to give publishing weeknotes a try. [Weeknotes](https://weeknot.es/what-on-earth-are-weeknotes-a81874c5cef9) are something that have been quietly popping up, and they’re essentially a journal-style blog post reflecting on a given week. They can be as personal, or impersonal as the writer likes. There’s no fixed cadence, so missing a couple of weeks here or there is no biggie, but they’re great ways of reflecting on a week. I’ll be starting by taking some of the ad-hoc notes and links I normally jot in Bear throughout the week, and running from there.
- Speedcurve and WPT are fantastic for debugging problems, but Puppeteer on its own might be an even better Swiss-army-knife for improving WebPerf (especially in local environments): [Michał Janaszek has a great article on the subject](https://michaljanaszek.com/blog/test-website-performance-with-puppeteer) with useful examples and I love this candlestick chart comparing different scenarios against different network states.
- Maybe obvious but still important: Saying problems are “hard” or “difficult” to a person sounds like we’re being lazy. Better to explain the reasons why something is hard, framed in a way that makes sense to that particular person.
- Riiiiiight, it’s ITIL time! An _Incident_ is disruption to service [whether customer impacting, or not], a _Problem_ is the cause of multiple incidents. A good analogy for complex systems is that of _symptoms_ and _causes_: Having a runny nose is potentially a _symptom_ caused by suffering from the flu, and the _symptom_ can be treated with certain medicine—A runny nose is an _incident_ that can be solved, but the underlying _problem_ of a flu will persist.
- “Python is the second-best language for everything”: This is an old saying which has stuck in my head for a while, recently resurfaced during [Dan Callahan's Keynote at PyCon2018](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITksU31c1WY).  As far as languages go, of the few I’ve dealt with, it’s not one I have particularly enjoyed, and so I’ve shied away from really learning and using it properly. And yet quote still really rings true. Between all these complicated provisioning shell scripts with snippets of `awk`, I’d much rather see them written Python because it’s imperative, syntactically consistent and easily testable: More approachable to an outsider. I think I should invest more time in learning Python.
- [Games Done Quick Express](https://gamesdonequick.com/schedule/24) is on this weekend, in support of the [TwitchCon Charity Plaza](https://twitchcon.tiltify.com/). *Neat.*
